=pod

=head1 NAME

HTML::FormFu::Model::DBIC - Integrate HTML::FormFu with DBIx::Class

=head1 VERSION

version 2.01

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Example of typical use in a Catalyst controller:

    sub edit : Chained {
        my ( $self, $c ) = @_;

        my $form = $c->stash->{form};
        my $book = $c->stash->{book};

        if ( $form->submitted_and_valid ) {

            # update dbic row with submitted values from form

            $form->model->update( $book );

            $c->response->redirect( $c->uri_for('view', $book->id) );
            return;
        }
        elsif ( !$form->submitted ) {

            # use dbic row to set form's default values

            $form->model->default_values( $book );
        }

        return;
    }

=head1 SETUP

For the form object to be able to access your L<DBIx::Class> schema, it needs
to be placed on the form stash, with the name C<schema>.

This is easy if you're using L<Catalyst-Controller-HTML-FormFu>, as you can
set this up to happen in your Catalyst app's config file.

For example, if your model is named C<MyApp::Model::Corp>, you would set this
(in L<Config::General> format):

    <Controller::HTML::FormFu>
        <model_stash>
            schema Corp
        </model_stash>
    </Controller::HTML::FormFu>

Or if your app's config file is in L<YAML> format:

    'Controller::HTML::FormFu':
        model_stash:
            schema: Corp

=head1 METHODS

=head2 default_values

Arguments: $dbic_row, [\%config]

Return Value: $form

    $form->model->default_values( $dbic_row );

Set a form's default values from the database, to allow a user to edit them.

=head2 update

Arguments: [$dbic_row], [\%config]

Return Value: $dbic_row

    $form->model->update( $dbic_row );

Update the database with the submitted form values.

=head2 create

Arguments: [\%config]

Return Value: $dbic_row

    my $dbic_row = $form->model->create( {resultset => 'Book'} );

Like L</update>, but doesn't require a C<$dbic_row> argument.

You need to ensure the DBIC schema is available on the form stash - see
L</SYNOPSIS> for an example config.

The C<resultset> must be set either in the method arguments, or the form or
block's C<model_config>.

An example of setting the ResultSet name on a Form:

    ---
    model_config:
      resultset: FooTable

    elements:
      # [snip]

=head2 options_from_model

Populates a multi-valued field with values from the database.

This method should not be called directly, but is called for you during
C<< $form->process >> by fields that inherit from
L<HTML::FormFu::Element::_Group>. This includes:

=over

=item L<HTML::FormFu::Element::Select>

=item L<HTML::FormFu::Element::Checkboxgroup>

=item L<HTML::FormFu::Element::Radiogroup>

=item L<HTML::FormFu::Element::ComboBox>

=back

To use you must set the appropriate C<resultset> on the element C<model_config>:

    element:
      - type: Select
        name: foo
        model_config:
          resultset: TableClass

=head1 BUILDING FORMS

=head2 single table

To edit the values in a row with no related rows, the field names simply have
to correspond to the database column names.

For the following DBIx::Class schema:

    package MySchema::Book;
    use base 'DBIx::Class';

    __PACKAGE__->load_components(qw/ Core /);

    __PACKAGE__->table("book");

    __PACKAGE__->add_columns(
        id     => { data_type => "INTEGER" },
        title  => { data_type => "TEXT" },
        author => { data_type => "TEXT" },
        blurb  => { data_type => "TEXT" },
    );

    __PACKAGE__->set_primary_key("id");

    1;

A suitable form for this might be:

    elements:
      - type: Text
        name: title

      - type: Text
        name: author

      - type: Textarea
        name: blurb

=head2 might_have and has_one relationships

Set field values from a related row with a C<might_have> or C<has_one>
relationship by placing the fields within a
L<Block|HTML::FormFu::Element::Block> (or any element that inherits from
Block, such as L<Fieldset|HTML::FormFu::Element::Fieldset>) with its
L<HTML::FormFu/nested_name> set to the relationship name.

For the following DBIx::Class schemas:

    package MySchema::Book;
    use base 'DBIx::Class';

    __PACKAGE__->load_components(qw/ Core /);

    __PACKAGE__->table("book");

    __PACKAGE__->add_columns(
        id    => { data_type => "INTEGER" },
        title => { data_type => "TEXT" },
    );

    __PACKAGE__->set_primary_key("id");

    __PACKAGE__->might_have( review => 'MySchema::Review', 'book' );

    1;


    package MySchema::Review;
    use base 'DBIx::Class';

    __PACKAGE__->load_components(qw/ Core /);

    __PACKAGE__->table("review");

    __PACKAGE__->add_columns(
        id          => { data_type => "INTEGER" },
        book        => { data_type => "INTEGER", is_nullable => 1 },
        review_text => { data_type => "TEXT" },
    );

    __PACKAGE__->set_primary_key("book");

    __PACKAGE__->belongs_to( book => 'MySchema::Book' );

    1;

A suitable form for this would be:

    elements:
      - type: Text
        name: title

      - type: Block
        nested_name: review
        elements:
          - type: Textarea
            name: review_text

For C<might_have> and C<has_one> relationships, you generally shouldn't need
to have a field for the related table's primary key, as DBIx::Class will
handle retrieving the correct row automatically.

You can also set a C<has_one> or C<might_have> relationship using a multi value
field like L<Select|HTML::FormFu::Element::Select>.

    elements:
      - type: Text
        name: title

      - type: Select
        nested: review
        model_config:
          resultset: Review

This will load all reviews into the select field. If you select a review from
that list, a current relationship to a review is removed and the new one is
added. This requires that the primary key of the C<Review> table and the
foreign key do not match.

=head2 has_many and many_to_many relationships

The general principle is the same as for C<might_have> and C<has_one> above,
except you should use a L<Repeatable|HTML::FormFu::Element::Repeatable>
element instead of a Block, and it needs to contain a
L<Hidden|HTML::FormFu::Element::Hidden> field corresponding to the primary key
of the related table.

The Repeatable block's
L<nested_name|HTML::FormFu::Element::Repeatable/nested_name> must be set to the
name of the relationship.

The Repeable block's
L<increment_field_names|HTML::FormFu::Element::Repeatable/increment_field_names>
must be true (which is the default value).

The Repeable block's
L<counter_name|HTML::FormFu::Element::Repeatable/counter_name> must be set to
the name of a L<Hidden|HTML::FormFu::Element::Hidden> field, which is placed
outside of the Repeatable block.
This field is used to store a count of the number of repetitions of the
Repeatable block were created.
When the form is submitted, this value is used during C<< $form->process >>
to ensure the form is rebuilt with the correct number of repetitions.

To allow the user to add new related rows, either C<empty_rows> or
C<new_rows_max> must be set - see L</"Config options for Repeatable blocks">
below.

For the following DBIx::Class schemas:

    package MySchema::Book;
    use base 'DBIx::Class';

    __PACKAGE__->load_components(qw/ Core /);

    __PACKAGE__->table("book");

    __PACKAGE__->add_columns(
        id    => { data_type => "INTEGER" },
        title => { data_type => "TEXT" },
    );

    __PACKAGE__->set_primary_key("id");

    __PACKAGE__->has_many( review => 'MySchema::Review', 'book' );

    1;


    package MySchema::Review;
    use base 'DBIx::Class';

    __PACKAGE__->load_components(qw/ Core /);

    __PACKAGE__->table("review");

    __PACKAGE__->add_columns(
        book        => { data_type => "INTEGER" },
        review_text => { data_type => "TEXT" },
    );

    __PACKAGE__->set_primary_key("book");

    __PACKAGE__->belongs_to( book => 'MySchema::Book' );

    1;

A suitable form for this might be:

    elements:
      - type: Text
        name: title

      - type: Hidden
        name: review_count

      - type: Repeatable
        nested_name: review
        counter_name: review_count
        model_config:
          empty_rows: 1
        elements:
          - type: Hidden
            name: book

          - type: Textarea
            name: review_text

=head2 belongs_to relationships

Belongs-to relationships can be edited / created with a ComboBox element.
If the user selects a value with the Select field, the belongs-to will be set
to an already-existing row in the related table.
If the user enters a value into the Text field, the belongs-to will be set
using a newly-created row in the related table.

    elements:
      - type: ComboBox
        name: author
        model_config:
          resultset: Author
          select_column: id
          text_column: name

The element name should match the relationship name.
C<< $field->model_config->{select_column} >> should match the related primary
column.
C<< $field->model_config->{text_column} >> should match the related text
column.

=head2 many_to_many selection

To select / deselect rows from a C<many_to_many> relationship, you must use
a multi-valued element, such as a
L<Checkboxgroup|HTML::FormFu::Element::Checkboxgroup> or a
L<Select|HTML::FormFu::Element::Select> with
L<multiple|HTML::FormFu::Element::Select/multiple> set.

The field's L<name|HTML::FormFu::Element::_Field/name> must be set to the
name of the C<many_to_many> relationship.

=head3 default_column

If you want to search / associate the related table by a column other it's
primary key, set C<< $field->model_config->{default_column} >>.

    ---
    element:
        - type: Checkboxgroup
          name: authors
          model_config:
            default_column: foo

=head3 link_values

If you want to set columns on the link table you can do so if you add a
C<link_values> attribute to C<model_config>:

    ---
    element:
        - type: Checkboxgroup
          name: authors
          model_config:
            link_values:
              foo: bar

=head3 additive

The default implementation will first remove all related objects and set the
new ones (see L<http://search.cpan.org/perldoc?DBIx::Class::Relationship::Base#set_$rel>).
If you want to add the selected objects to the current set of objects
set C<additive> in the C<model_config>.

    ---
    element:
        - type: Checkboxgroup
          name: authors
          model_config:
            additive: 1
            options_from_model: 0

L</options_from_model> is set to C<0> because it will try to fetch
all objects from the result class C<Authors> if C<model_config> is specified
without a C<resultset> attribute.)

=head1 COMMON ARGUMENTS

The following items are supported in the optional C<config> hash-ref argument
to the methods L<default_values>, L<update> and L<create>.

=over

=item base

If you want the method to process a particular Block element, rather than the
whole form, you can pass the element as a C<base> argument.

    $form->default_values(
        $row,
        {
            base => $formfu_element,
        },
    );

=item nested_base

If you want the method to process a particular Block element by
L<name|HTML::FormFu::Element/name>, you can pass the name as an argument.

    $form->default_values(
        $row,
        {
            nested_base => 'foo',
        }'
    );

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION

=head2 Config options for fields

The following items are supported as C<model_config> options on form fields.

=over

=item accessor

If set, C<accessor> will be used as a method-name accessor on the
C<DBIx::Class> row object, instead of using the field name.

=item ignore_if_empty

If the submitted value is blank, no attempt will be made to save it to the database.

=item null_if_empty

If the submitted value is blank, save it as NULL to the database. Normally an empty string is saved as NULL when its corresponding field is numeric, and as an empty string when its corresponding field is a text field. This option is useful for changing the default behavior for text fields.

=item delete_if_empty

Useful for editing a "might_have" related row containing only one field.

If the submitted value is blank, the related row is deleted.

For the following DBIx::Class schemas:

    package MySchema::Book;
    use base 'DBIx::Class';

    __PACKAGE__->load_components(qw/ Core /);

    __PACKAGE__->table("book");

    __PACKAGE__->add_columns(
        id    => { data_type => "INTEGER" },
        title => { data_type => "TEXT" },
    );

    __PACKAGE__->set_primary_key("id");

    __PACKAGE__->might_have( review => 'MySchema::Review', 'book' );

    1;


    package MySchema::Review;
    use base 'DBIx::Class';

    __PACKAGE__->load_components(qw/ Core /);

    __PACKAGE__->table("review");

    __PACKAGE__->add_columns(
        book        => { data_type => "INTEGER" },
        review_text => { data_type => "TEXT" },
    );

    __PACKAGE__->set_primary_key("book");

    __PACKAGE__->belongs_to( book => 'MySchema::Book' );

    1;

A suitable form for this would be:

    elements:
      - type: Text
        name: title

      - type: Block
        nested_name: review
        elements:
          - type: Text
            name: review_text
            model_config:
              delete_if_empty: 1

=item label

To use a column value for a form field's
L<label|HTML::FormFu::Element::_Field/label>.

=back

=head2 Config options for fields within a Repeatable block

=over

=item delete_if_true

Intended for use on a L<Checkbox|HTML::FormFu::Element::Checkbox> field.

If the checkbox is checked, the following occurs: for a has-many relationship,
the related row is deleted; for a many-to-many relationship, the relationship
link is removed.

An example of use might be:

    elements:
      - type: Text
        name: title

      - type: Hidden
        name: review_count

      - type: Repeatable
        nested_name: review
        counter_name: review_count
        elements:
          - type: Hidden
            name: book

          - type: Textarea
            name: review_text

          - type: Checkbox
            name: delete_review
            label: 'Delete Review?'
            model_config:
              delete_if_true: 1

Note: make sure the name of this field does not clash with one of your
L<DBIx::Class::Row> method names (e.g. "delete") - see L</CAVEATS>.

=back

=head2 Config options for Repeatable blocks

=over

=item empty_rows

For a Repeatable block corresponding to a has-many or many-to-many
relationship, to allow the user to insert new rows, set C<empty_rows> to
the number of extra repetitions you wish added to the end of the Repeatable
block.

=item new_rows_max

Set to the maximum number of new rows that a Repeatable block is allowed to
add.

If not set, it will fallback to the value of C<empty_rows>.

=back

=head2 Config options for options_from_model

The column used for the element values is set with the C<model_config>
value C<id_column> - or if not set, the table's primary column is used.

    element:
      - type: Select
        name: foo
        model_config:
          resultset: TableClass
          id_column: pk_col

The column used for the element labels is set with the C<model_config>
value C<label_column> - or if not set, the first text/varchar column found
in the table is used - or if one is not found, the C<id_column> is used
instead.

    element:
      - type: Select
        name: foo
        model_config:
          resultset: TableClass
          label_column: label_col

To pass the database label values via the form's localization object, set
C<localize_label>

    element:
      - type: Select
        name: foo
        model_config:
          localize_label: 1

You can set a C<condition>, which will be passed as the 1st argument to
L<DBIx::Class::ResultSet/search>.

    element:
      - type: Select
        name: foo
        model_config:
          resultset: TableClass
          condition:
            type: is_foo

You can set a C<condition_from_stash>, which will be passed as the 1st argument to
L<DBIx::Class::ResultSet/search>.

C<key> is the column-name to be passed to
L<search|DBIx::Class::ResultSet/search>,
and C<stash_key> is the name of a key on the form L<stash|HTML::FormFu/stash>
from which the value to be passed to L<search|DBIx::Class::ResultSet/search>
is found.

    element:
      - type: Select
        name: foo
        model_config:
          resultset: TableClass
          condition_from_stash:
            key: stash_key

Is comparable to:

    $form->element({
        type => 'Select',
        name => 'foo',
        model_config => {
            resultset => 'TableClass',
            condition => {
                key => $form->stash->{stash_key}
            }
        }
    })

You can set C<attributes>, which will be passed as the 2nd argument to
L<DBIx::Class::ResultSet/search>.

=head3 ENUM Column Type

If the field name matches (case-insensitive) a column name with type 'ENUM'
and the Schema contains enum values in
C<< $resultset->column_info($name)->{extra}{list} >>, the field's options
will be populated with the enum values.

=head1 FAQ

=head2 Add extra values not in the form

To update values to the database which weren't submitted to the form,
you can first add them to the form with L<add_valid|HTML::FormFu/add_valid>.

    my $passwd = generate_passwd();

    $form->add_valid( passwd => $passwd );

    $form->model->update( $row );

C<add_valid> works for fieldnames that don't exist in the form.

=head2 Set a field read only

You can make a field read only. The value of such fields cannot be changed by
the user even if they submit a value for it.

  $field->model_config->{read_only} = 1;

  - Name: field
    model_config:
      read_only: 1

See L<HTML::FormFu::Element::Label>.

=head1 CAVEATS

To ensure your column's inflators and deflators are called, we have to
get / set values using their named methods, and not with C<get_column> /
C<set_column>.

Because of this, beware of having column names which clash with DBIx::Class
built-in method-names, such as C<delete>. - It will have obviously
undesirable results!

=head1 REMOVED METHODS

=head2 new_empty_row

See C<empty_rows> in L</"Config options for Repeatable blocks"> instead.

=head2 new_empty_row_multi

See C<new_rows_max> in L</"Config options for Repeatable blocks"> instead.

=head2 Range constraint

See C<empty_rows> in L</"Config options for Repeatable blocks"> instead.

=head1 SUPPORT

Project Page:

L<http://code.google.com/p/html-formfu/>

Mailing list:

L<http://lists.scsys.co.uk/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/html-formfu>

Mailing list archives:

L<http://lists.scsys.co.uk/pipermail/html-formfu/>

=head1 BUGS

Please submit bugs / feature requests to
L<http://code.google.com/p/html-formfu/issues/list> (preferred) or
L<http://rt.perl.org>.

=head1 GITHUB REPOSITORY

This module's sourcecode is maintained in a git repository at
L<git://github.com/fireartist/HTML-FormFu-Model-DBIC.git>

The project page is L<https://github.com/fireartist/HTML-FormFu-Model-DBIC>

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<HTML::FormFu>, L<DBIx::Class>, L<Catalyst::Controller::HTML::FormFu>

=head1 AUTHOR

Carl Franks

=head1 CONTRIBUTORS

Based on the code of C<DBIx::Class::HTML::FormFu>, which was contributed to
by:

Adam Herzog

Daisuke Maki

Mario Minati

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2007 by Carl Franks

Based on the original source code of L<DBIx::Class::HTMLWidget>, copyright
Thomas Klausner.

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself, either Perl version 5.8.8 or,
at your option, any later version of Perl 5 you may have available.

=cut
